.\" @(#)xlock.man 1.4 89/02/16; Copyright (c) 1989 - Sun Microsystems, Inc.
.TH XLOCK 1 "16 Feb 1989" "X11/NeWS 1.0"
.SH NAME
xlock \- Locks the local X display till a password is entered.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xlock
[
.BI \-time " timeout"
]
[
.BI \-count " pixelcount"
]
[
.B \-font " fontname"
]
[
.B \-mono
]
[
.B \-saver
]
[
.B \-root
]
[
.B \-v
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B xlock
locks the X server till the user enters their password at the keyboard.
While
.B xlock
is running,
all new server connections are refused.
The screen saver is disabled.
The mouse cursor is turned off.
The screen is blanked and the "real plane" iterative fractals from
the September 1986 issue of Scientific American are put on the screen.
The pattern changes after
.I timeout
seconds. 
If a key or a mouse button is pressed then the user is prompted for the
password of the user who started
.B xlock.

If the correct password is typed, then the screen is unlocked and the X
server is restored.  When typing the password, characters are not echoed
to the screen, but Control-U and Control-H are active as kill and erase
respectively. 

.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B \-time " timeout"
The
.I time
option sets the number of seconds that each unique fractal will remain on
the screen before being replaced by the next one to
.I timeout.
.TP 5
.B \-count " pixelcount"
The
.I count
option sets the number of pixels to draw in each color.  The coordinates are
calculated in batches of
.I pixelcount
pixels, then sent to the screen in a single color.  Faster machines,
expecially machines with floating point hardware can set this to a
higher number and still have fast changing fractals.
.TP 5
.B \-font " fontname"
The
.I font
option sets the font to be used on the prompt screen.
.TP 5
.B \-mono
The
.I mono
option causes xlock to display monochrome, (black and white) pixels rather
than the default colored ones.
.TP 5
.B \-saver
The
.I saver
option causes xlock to only draw the fractals and not lock the display.
A keypress or a mouse click will terminate the screen saver.
.TP 5
.B \-root
The
.I root
option allows the root password to unlock the server as well as the user
who started xlock.
.SH BUGS
"kill -KILL
.B xlock
" causes server to be unusable, since
.B xlock
has removed all hosts (including localhost) from the access control list
to lock out all new X clients, and SIGKILL cannot be caught by any program,
.B xlock
will terminate before restoring the access control list.  This will
leave the X server in a state where
\fI "you can no longer connect to that server, and this operation cannot be
reversed short of resetting the server."\fP
		-From the X11R2 Xlib Documentation page 140. 
.SH SEE ALSO
X(1), Xlib Documentation.

.SH AUTHOR
 Patrick J. Naughton	 (naughton@wind.sun.com)
 Window Systems Group
 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
 Mountain View, CA  94043
 415/336-1080

.SH COPYRIGHT
 Copyright (c) 1989 by Sun Microsystems, Inc.

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted,
provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
supporting documentation. 

.SH CONTRIBUTORS
  milliken@heron.bbn.com	karlton@wsl.dec.com
  dana@thumper.bellcore.com	vesper@3d.dec.com
